The authors of the **PlantDoc: A Dataset for Visual Plant Disease Detection** recognized the importance of training models with real-life images to account for the complexities of the real world. In light of this, they decided to create a dataset for accurate plant disease detection in the farm setting by downloading images from Google Images and Ecosia. Collecting large-scale plant disease data through fieldwork would have required significant effort, so they gathered approximately 20,900 images making the final dataset having a total of 27 classes spanning over 13 species with 2,598 images. <i>Numbers in the claimed and the actual dataset differ.</i>

To ensure the quality and relevance of the collected images, four users filtered the images based on their metadata from the websites and guidelines provided on [APSNet](https://www.apsnet.org/edcenter/resources/commonnames/Pages/default.aspx). The American Phytopathological Society (APS) had compiled a list of peer-reviewed literature corresponding to each plant disease, which the authors referred to in their classification process. Several important factors, such as colour, area, and density of the diseased part, as well as the shape of the species, were considered during the classification process. Inappropriate and duplicate images across classes were removed from the downloaded dataset.

To reduce labeling errors, every image was checked by two individuals following the guidelines. To ensure sufficient training samples, classes with less than 50 images were removed, resulting in a final dataset with 27 classes spanning over 13 species, comprising 2,598 images. <i>Note, that this number of images (taken from the research paper) slightly differs from the actual one on the DatasetNinja (2482 images).</i>

For the object detection task, which required exact bounding regions containing the leaf in each image, the authors used the [LabelImg tool](https://github.com/tzutalin/labelImg) to create bounding boxes around the leaves. In cases where the image contained multiple leaves or a combination of diseased and healthy leaves, all the leaves were labeled explicitly with their respective classes. The authors took care to ensure that the entire leaf was encompassed within the bounding box, and that the area of the bounding box was not smaller than approximately 1/8th of the image size. After labeling, the information about the coordinates of the boxes and their respective class labels was stored separately in an XML file corresponding to each image.
